So to understand medical device regulation,
you need to understand the process of medical device regulation.
Process usually consists of two parts.
First, there is the part that's called the
Clearance for certain types of medical devices,
like class two and class three medical devices,
you need to submit a documentation package to the FDA,
showing what kind of device have you built,
and proving that you have built this device
complying with certain quality bars that FDA would like you to meet.
Second thing that you need to put in place,
you need to put in place a Quality Management System.
Whereas clearance is something that you do once,
quality management system is something that you as a company
that's deployed this AI algorithm into the clinic,
needs to comply with the need to sustain.
You need to show that you have a quality management system which allows you to maintain
the quality level that you've demonstrated in
your clearance when you've submitted initial documentation package.
A few words under the FDA quality management system.
FDA Quality Management System is regulated by federal law, 21 CFR 820,
part 30, or in case of a European regulatory bodies,
is the ISO standards, 13485.
You can look up actually either one of those things and get a pretty good idea.
It's fairly clearly written what exactly is required.
This regulation defines procedures that have to be put in place
and defines things like design review process for your software,
or things like software verification and validation protocols,
or maybe storage of software artifacts,
and who and at what point needs to have access to what sort of software artifacts,
and some other things.
The FDA Clearance Process,
which is as you remember,
this is onetime documentation package that you sent to FDA upfront,
involves putting together information about things
like your software requirement specification of your software,
or things like software design specifications,
maybe some traceability analysis,
showing that all of your software requirements have been implemented
and have tests that confirmed that they had been implemented.
It may have hazard analysis,
which is a register of all the risks that you foresee that
your software might encounter and how you plan to mitigate those risks.
It might have some architecture diagrams.
One other thing that FDA clearance package would need to have,
is verification and validation documentation.
A little bit of a reminder from the world of software engineering.
Verification is a process of proving that should build the thing right.
Is a process of proving that you have satisfied all your software requirements.
Validation is the process of proving that you have built the right thing,
that you have built what you intended to be built,
and that if you say that your thing for example,
can classify, let's say, tumors,
or it can compute the volumes of certain lesions in the lungs with a certain accuracy.
Validation process would be all about
proving that this is actually what your algorithm can do.
This is where it gets interesting for the data scientist,
because if you are developing an AI algorithm,
it is likely that this algorithm will be
brought to the real world through some sort of software,
where this algorithm would be a key differentiating feature.
This is why as a data scientist,
it is likely that you will be
asked more likely to provide input into this validation process,
and to design this process of proving that
your algorithm actually meets this requirements that you have set in front of yourself.
Actually one thing to remember,
there is a public database of all the clearances that have been submitted to the FDA,
and you can look up what other people wrote in
this clearance and how they approach the process of validating their software.
So again, what role does FDA
play or other regulatory bodies play in the life of an AI engineer?
The biggest impact would be contributing to the validation process.
You will need to prove that you are solving actually
the problem that you are claimed to be solving and you need to be methodical about that.
FDA has quite a good guidance in validation
of medical software and I invite you to take a look at that.
We'll post some links at the bottom of this concept.
Your Validation plan, the input into
the validation process might be looking at things like,
what is the intended use?
So remember the intended use,
which defines whether your thing is the medical device or not,
you need to be clear about what the thing is intended to be used for.
Also, if it's a machine learning algorithm
and it's been trained using some sort of training data,
you need to provide evidence that you acquired your training data in
a consistent process and that represents which you expect to see in the real world.
So we need to prove where did you get your ground truth from and why do you
think it's a reasonable ground truth to be used for solving this problem?
You might also be required to tell how did you measure the performance of your algorithm?
What performance metrics did you use and
what do clinicians think about those performance metrics?
Are this performance metrics actually confirming that
your algorithm is performing well in the clinic and is solving the clinical problem?
Also, some other considerations
that you need to take in mind as you're building this validation plan,
is thinking about the data that your algorithm will meet in the real world,
and what type of data your algorithm will perform well on,
and what type of data it will not perform well on,
and why do you think that?
In the final project that we will do after this exercise,
you will be asked to write up a little validation plan proposal.
As you are writing that,
think about all this questions as they pertain
to the problem that you are solving within the final project.